# Lyrics Generator

## Introduction and Motivation

I developed this Python project due to my passion for music, including listening to, writing, and playing it. Additionally, I wanted to delve deeper into the field of Natural Language Processing (NLP), which has gained significant attention recently. The advancement of modern technology has greatly aided artists in honing their skills and exploring their creativity to the fullest extent. Machine Learning (ML) techniques can also be effectively employed for these purposes, which was the primary objective behind initiating this project. My intention was not only to enjoy reading computer-generated lyrics but also to potentially incorporate them into an original song and compose guitar chords to complement them.

------------------

## Methods

### Data Retrieval

Artist data (such as artist name and genre) is retrieved from [MTV's Top 10,000 Music Artists](https://gist.github.com/mbejda/9912f7a366c62c1f296c#file-10000-mtv-music-artists-page-1-csv), filtered by genre, and fed to the [LyricsGenius](https://lyricsgenius.readthedocs.io/en/master/) which then pulls in lyrics data from a user-specified number of songs for each artist. Data retrieval and further preprocessing, such as cleaning and tokenizing the data (see below), is done in the `helpers.py` file.

### Preprocessing

In order to properly tokenize the song lyrics, certain erroneous data has to be removed from the raw strings delivered by LyricsGenius. For example, advertisements, song structure formatting and labelling, inconsistent whitespace, and irrelevant song production data must be removed from each song's raw lyric data. Removing these from the song lyrics retrieved from the LyricsGenius API is pretty straightforward using Python's regular expression support module ([re](https://docs.python.org/3/library/re.html)), however the songs sometimes have unique inconsistencies which presents another challenge to the data cleaning process. With such a large amount of data being used to train the model, it is difficult to algorithmically pin down where every single inconsistency exists. This merits further investigation into more optimal ways to leverage some other text-filtering module or even using a different or secondary origin from which to retreive lyric data. Once the raw data is cleaned, the remaining lyrics are tokenized by word.

I took inspiration and adapted code from [this ActiveState article](https://www.activestate.com/blog/how-to-build-a-lyrics-generator-with-python-recurrent-neural-networks/) and [this Machine Learning Mastery article](https://machinelearningmastery.com/how-to-develop-a-word-level-neural-language-model-in-keras/).

### Model

The LSTM network utilized in this project is designed using layers built from TensorFlow's Keras package.

### Improvements

The project is still a work in progress. Some adjustments that need to be made include:
* Improving the data cleaning process to filter out erroneous data.
    * Described in the [Data Retrieval](#data-retrieval) section above.
* Optimizing the architecture of the LSTM.
* Look into ways of making the generated song lyrics have a rhyme scheme.
* Make README file more in-depth.
* Creating a UI and API.

------------------

## Results

Example outputs trained on 1000 country songs by 250 different artists:

"you lose your mind"  
you lose your mind  
put a smile on your face  
when i'm about to blackout  
i wanna go another round  
another shot of you is all it takes to drown  
when i'm about to blackout   
i wanna go another round   
another shot of you 

"i wanna get going"  
i wanna get to going   
let me tell you something   
you ain't nothing  
but a champagne promise  
all the pain that i know  
and i bet you thought i wouldn't know  
about what turns you on  
what you like this is all 

The above are two of the best (i.e. most coherent) songs generated by the model from a total of 40, each of which had 5 iterations with differing levels of diversity. Further tweaking will definitely yield better results, but this is a good start.